you're standing in a room full of
explosive gas
one spark could cause an explosion so
powerful that all the windows and doors
would be just blown out with a huge
column of fire and you're holding a
match
you need a bigger target than this room
how about the largest room of explosive
gas in our entire solar system
meet jupiter it's the fifth planet from
the sun
and the largest one in our system it's
11 times the width of earth
and almost two and a half times heavier
than all the other planets in our solar
system combined
if we put jupiter on the scales we would
need about 317
earths to balance it but most
importantly
it has a lot of methane in its
atmosphere it's the gas we use in our
kitchen
or fill up our car with and it burns
just fine
more importantly there's metallic
hydrogen
in its normal state hydrogen is the
lightest element in the universe
but on jupiter it's at great pressure
more than 400 million atmospheres
by comparison on earth you feel the
pressure of
one atmosphere so multiply that by 400
million
and hydrogen is compressed so much that
it looks like liquid metal
metallic hydrogen can be a great fuel
it'll give off
20 times more energy than burning
ordinary hydrogen
so you and your match can have great fun
out there
okay here we go
the first problem is distance jupiter is
only one planet away from us
but the path is also blocked by the
asteroid belt
behind mars it's full of giant rock
debris
on average each asteroid could be as
wide as the distance from los angeles to
las vegas
there's rocks the size of an entire
state
and the biggest asteroid of them all is
ceres
it's almost as wide as alaska it's even
considered a dwarf planet
and this dangerous journey to jupiter
takes about 650 days
that's almost two years of boredom
inside a spaceship
by comparison the longest time
astronauts have spent aboard a spaceship
is 84 days but we'll let you take your
favorite dvd collection and a couple
bags of popcorn
at the end of the day you'll be able to
get some sleep after a hard day at work
fast forward two years into the future
and you've arrived at your destination
you're already imagining lighting a
match at the surface of jupiter
exploding it like a balloon oh
be careful when you get close to it
because of jupiter's great weight
it has a strong gravitational force
about three times stronger than back
home on earth
the closer you get to its surface the
weaker you feel
and you can even barely stand on your
feet the maximum weight you can lift
here
is also three times less and even a
match you're holding in your hand
already feels heavier if you try to jump
up
you need more effort actually you can't
even do that
because jupiter is a gas giant that
means it has no solid surface
theoretically the deeper you dive into
these clouds
the more pressure you'll feel gradually
the clouds and gases thicken
and form a kind of liquid but you don't
have to dive that deep
methane is a light gas and it's closer
to the surface
so this is the moment of truth you take
a match
you flick it on the box and nothing
happens
well let's give it a couple more tries
second match
third nothing works
okay you've got a gas burner in your
backpack you unscrew the valve to
maximum and
nothing happens again
well that's because it takes three
components to start the combustion
process
the first is fuel luckily there's enough
methane and metallic hydrogen on jupiter
to blow up the whole planet in a matter
of seconds
the second component is the ignition
source it's the initial force that will
start the combustion process
it could be a spark an electrical
discharge or
a match like the one you have in your
hand and the last ingredient
is oxygen yes the same oxygen that we
breathe
it's just as important to fire as the
fuel itself
for an experiment try lighting a small
candle
now cover it with a glass you see how
the fire keeps burning for a few seconds
and then goes out
the fuel is still there but the fire has
used up
all the oxygen inside the glass and the
burning process
is over the same thing happens on
jupiter
there just can't be fire simply because
there's no oxygen
and you didn't even have to fly there to
find that out from earth
we can see hundreds of thousands of
little meteorites falling on jupiter
the asteroid belt next to it is to blame
for this when they hit its atmosphere
they start to burn and that doesn't
instantly blow up the entire planet
but don't be upset there's still a way
to ignite this gas giant planet
all you have to do is trigger a
thermonuclear chain reaction on the
planet
then there'll be an explosion so
powerful it'll be visible from earth
and it will be like the birth of a new
star
to do that we need to detonate a nuclear
reactor
like the ones that give us electricity
here on earth in fact we'd have to send
everything we have to jupiter but even
that won't do the trick
big asteroids when they hit the planet
cause a much bigger explosion
in 2009 a meteorite the size of five
soccer fields
hit jupiter it caused an explosion of 5
billion tons of tnt this incident left a
dark spot the size of the pacific ocean
and an even bigger explosion happened
there in 1994 after that collision
there was a giant spot on jupiter almost
the size of our planet
but strong winds and storms quickly
began to sweep away the traces of the
explosion
after a few weeks jupiter looked like
normal
the problem is that our attempts to blow
up the gas giant
took place on the planet's surface we
need to plant a charge the size of the
moon
deep below a massive explosion will
cause a thermonuclear reaction
and cause the metallic hydrogen to
detonate
the explosive process is set and within
seconds
jupiter explodes like a giant balloon
but this spectacle
will be the last one that humanity ever
sees
the explosion would disturb the stable
orbits of earth and the other planets
the trajectory of earth around the sun
might change
and we may see the dawn not in the east
but on any other side of the world
when the strong wind from the explosion
reaches the earth
it'll start scraping our atmosphere soon
our planet will lose its ozone layer
it was our shield that protected us from
solar radiation
in such a situation we'll have to hide
underground for the rest of our lives
but even this can't protect us before
long
the earth will be showered with
thousands of meteorites
jupiter was so heavy that it held the
asteroid belt in place
without it the asteroids would start
flying towards us
earth would feel a constant meteor
shower but there would be no one left on
earth to observe it anymore
jupiter's explosion can be compared to a
supernova
in fact jupiter is practically a star if
it were just a little bigger and heavier
it would start to shrink the intense
pressure on the planet's core
would start thermal nuclear reactions
eventually
jupiter will have turned into a brown
dwarf and it would be 50 times heavier
than it is now
but because it doesn't have enough
weight to do that jupiter is sometimes
called
a failed star well
maybe we should visit other gas planets
in our solar system and try to light our
match there
saturn saturn's atmosphere is similar to
jupiter
but there's no oxygen for combustion
there either so
all you have to do is admire the
planet's beautiful rings
and move on well uranus and neptune are
much smaller
and they don't have metallic hydrogen so
their explosion wouldn't be as strong
but you still wouldn't be able to ignite
them with a match because
there's no atmosphere full of oxygen but
there is one planet where you could
light a fire with your match
it's gj1132b and it's 39 light years
away
scientists think it might have oxygen on
it although it's not a gas giant that
has combustible gases in its atmosphere
but you can still sit on its rocky
ground and make a fire to admire the
unusual sunset